What I'm saying is that the effort on Huggman's
part was an effort that largely worked with some
key downtown property owners to get something
done in terms of the river. Huggman's idea was
basically to, rather than the city turning its
back on the river, was to make the river a very
attractive amenity. And he came up with the idea of
the the shops of Romulus and Aragon, I think the
names are. And his entire plans, all his original
drawings are in the archives of the University of
Texas at Austin, although the San Antonio
Conservation Society has a complete set of his
drawings which are reproducible. So if anybody
wanted to get a set. But the key thing was in that
effort was to get the property owners to come up
with enough money downtown to cause the federal
government to come in with its major funds through
the WPA and do the project. An election was held and
it was some incredible minor amount of money. I
think the whole That whole river walk was
originally done for under a half million dollars.
It was just an unbelievably small amount of money.
But that, again, was initiated, again, as a
private sector effort. And it did require the
cooperation of local government and federal
government. But it wasn't something that we
really the local government initiated. La Vita,
it was more the idea of a single person, Maury
Maverick, who just coincidentally happened to be
mayor at the time and a former congressman very
close to FDR.
The Riverwalk, for many years, remained a very
dangerous area of downtown. And it wasn't until,
essentially, from what I gather, the post-World
War II era, that things really got moving quickly.
Oh, it was a lot later than that, actually. As
I said, after the initial improvements were made
in the 1940s, it wasn't until the 1960s that
anything started happening on the river. And
there were a couple of things there that triggered
that, one of which was the
effort of a committee of the Greater San Antonio
Chamber of Commerce I think Cy Wagner, the
architect, had a major role. The San Antonio
chapter of the American Institute of Architects
and the Chamber of Commerce did a study to look at,
now that you've got this amenity, what can you do to
make it commercially viable and to get people down
there? And there were a number of people, and
again, that's a well-documented thing, there
were a number of people that worked on that study.
So that was one thing. The second thing was the
hemisphere that was held in San Antonio in 1968 did
a couple of things. One, it brought an enormous
amount of visitors to San Antonio and really
exposed the Riverwalk. And it extended the
Riverwalk about 1,500 feet from its original path
into the Hemisphere Plaza site, which was an urban
renewal project. And that caused, I think, a lot of
the renewed interest in the river. And if you look
at the institutions on the river today, the
Kangaroo Court, which was one of the first
restaurant bars on the river, and some of the
actors like the David Strausses and the Hatton
Beltmans, their interest, their business
interest in the river dates from that hemisphere
period. So it wasn't until the mid to late 1960s
that the river really kind of took off again. So
almost 20 years went by when the river was largely
ignored, except as a nice place to walk. But there
wasn't the diversity and the commercial vitality
that existed to that. And then the Colosseum del
Rio was built for the fair, by Zachary. an alum of
A&M, overnight
virtually. Yes, that's true.
OK, let's move on. You've mentioned several
individuals already that have influenced the
planning in San Antonio.
Taking a look at the formal planning of San Antonio
again, rather than citizen groups or whatever,
Let's go through the sequence of planning
directors and what contribution they brought to
San Antonio.
Okay.
Well, again, the official planning director in
San Antonio dates from the charter. And actually,
the commission, the charter, as I mentioned,
mandated a commission and a department. And the
department was to support the commission. One of
the interesting things about San Antonio is that
although there's a council manager form of
government,
there's always been some confusion about to whom
the director of planning shall report. And
actually, the director of planning has two bosses
in San Antonio. One is the city manager as a
department head, and the other is the planning
commission. The city manager by virtue of the form
of government and the planning commission by
virtue of Article IX of the city charter. The first
planning director in the city of San Antonio was
not appointed until March of 1952. And he was an
engineer from Austin, Texas, by the name of
William O. Parker. P-A-R-K-E-R. He became the
first planning director. And really not a great, I
don't really know a great deal about any
contributions that he made. And I think I'm going
to have all of these, these planning directors,
but I may be leaving some out and I need to check on
that. The second identifiable planning director
was M. Winston Martin. And He served for a fairly
short period of time. Martin was significant in a
couple of respects. One, he was significant
because the second formal planning effort in San
Antonio, which even predated the charter, was the
development of a plan in 1951
that was basically an urban renewal plan. In other
words, the city of San Antonio was eager to get into
the urban renewal business. And in order to do
that, there were certain requirements of the
federal government to have a plan. And so, Winston
Martin, working with Walter Lilly, who was a local
planning consultant, basically put together the
second formal plan that the city of San Antonio
had. And I think that date, I think that was
approved in 1951. Yes, December of 1951 that plan
was approved. And that served as the basis for San
Antonio to get into the whole... thing of urban
renewal. And Martin left his directorship of the
planning department to assume the directorship
of the local urban renewal authority. So Martin,
and Winston Martin is basically still there. He's
still heading the local urban renewal authority.
So he was responsible for having a key part in the
second plan, and then becoming the first urban
renewal director. He was succeeded for a period of
time by Ralph Bender. Bender came to San Antonio as
Martin's assistant, and after about a six-month
period of time, he assumed the directorship of the
Department of Planning, and was there only for a
year or two, and left and went with when Ray Ellison
was starting his home building empire and was the
third man at Ellison. And this is where it becomes a
little foggy, but I think Steve Taylor succeeded
Bender as director of planning. I could be wrong on
that. Taylor appears to have had the longest
tenure of anyone as director of planning. left the
planning department at the end of 1970, in
December of 1970. And as far as I know, from the mid
to late 1950s until 1970, Steve Taylor was the
director of planning. Now, that was an
interesting regime for a number of reasons. First
of all, the planning department grew quite a bit
during that period of time. in those early days
when Parker and Martin and Vendor were the
planning department, they virtually by
themselves were almost it. In other words, there
were very few professional staff. But during
Taylor's tenure, substantial professional
staff were added, including whom I would consider
kind of the first professional planners. It's
arguable whether Bender at that time, Bender's
training was all in architecture, although he
worked as a planning consultant and had worked for
another city as a planner. It may be arguable
whether he was the first professional planner in
the city of San Antonio. Many attribute that to a
guy by the name of Bill Telford, who was a graduate
of Texas A&M, who was probably the first person the
city planning department hired who had a degree in
city planning. But people like Larry Travis,
who's a well-known architect and planner, also
worked for the planning department during that
period of time. I'd like to say a few things about
Taylor's... Bill, of course, went on to become
president of the Texas, no, of the Gulf Southwest
chapter of AIP. Right, right. And is now a
consultant in private practice with a firm called
Hallenberger and Telford. Doing well, I hear.
Doing fine.
The point about Taylor's thing, Taylor's long
tenure as planning director, is that there were a
number of attempts during this period of time to
get the city to do some plan, another plan. In other
words, from time to time, someone would look at the
charter, either someone on the commission or
someone on the council or some citizen and say, the
city really doesn't have an official plan. The
city adopted the Urban Renewal Plan 51, but that
lacked many of the elements that we think of as key
to a plan. For example, there was no land use
element. I don't even remember if there was a, I
don't think there was a transportation element.
So significant elements were not there. So Taylor
attempted in response to the times to work with the
powers that be to engage in some planning efforts.
And a couple of interesting things happened. One
was that in 1961,
some of the elected officials, the council
members, felt that only way that some planning was
going to get done was to split the then Planning and
Zoning Commission in two bodies. To have a Zoning
Commission and then to have a Planning Commission
and charge the Planning Commission with coming up
with a plan. So the Commission was actually split
in 1961 and remained split for almost two years and
was joined back together in 1963 when during the
intervening period, the Planning Commission had
really done nothing except to approve
subdivision plans. And that was the first attempt
to split the commission in two with the specific
intent of charging the Planning Commission with
doing some planning. It didn't happen. Taylor's
staff, though, during the 60s, was engaged in a
number of attempts to come up with a comprehensive
plan. It's also kind of interesting, and this
is... Steve Taylor is still around, by the way, and
needs to be talked to. He's in the redevelopment
agency? No, Steve Taylor is with the district
office of the Texas Department of Highway and
Public Transportation in San Antonio. But it was
very interesting because of the leadership in San
Antonio during the 1960s, and that was the period
during which Walter McAllister, senior, was
mayor. And he was a very strong mayor. In fact, he
was almost a strong mayor of former government
when he was mayor. He basically didn't want the
planning department messing around with certain
areas. And rumor mill has it that he actually went
down and talked to the director of planning at one
time and just listed things that he didn't want the
planning department messing with in terms of
areas. And I think that's kind of indicative of the
view of many people in the community, and
particularly the elected officials, toward
planning. One of the things that we'll see in San
Antonio is that, in my opinion, most of the
community did not recognize the need for a
municipal corporation to engage in planning
until relatively recently. But the significant
thing about
Steve
Taylor's reign is that in somewhere and I don't
know exactly when this was but somewhere in the mid
to late 1960s the city planning department came up
with what is called a development plan of San
Antonio and I think this is a fascinating document
I'm holding in front of me it's a single fold out
plan that has a little introduction in history and
then deals with all of the key issues on one side.
It's just a large fold up. So it deals with all of the
key issues on one side. So it's got an introduction
of population and economy transportation, land
use, utilities. And then on the other side
contains a single graphic, which given the fact
that this was done in probably around the period
67, 68, 69, is amazing in dealing with how the
community actually grew, now that we can look back
in hindsight, 20 years almost 20 years later. It
was amazing in its ability to predict the location
of facilities. And it's a single graphic which
deals with land use, community facilities,
transportation, and all of that. And the story
about this plan is that it was so threatening to
people, this single graphic. that all copies were
confiscated and locked in the basement of City
Hall for some number of years. And again, that's
indicative of probably the attitude of San
Antonio toward planning. But again, this is an
amazing single graphic document. that is, as I
said, amazingly predictive in what actually
happened. Have those copies been released now?
No, but there are a few copies around. I have a few
copies of this in my own collection. So that was...
We should get one for the project. Yes, we will try
to arrange that. So that was Taylor. So Taylor, as I
said, left the planning department in December of
1970. And then he was followed. Well, first of all,
there was an interim acting director, a guy by the
name of Wilkerson, W-I-L-K-E-R-S-O-N,
Wilkerson, J.H. Wilkerson, who served for almost
a year. as kind of a transitional acting director.
And for the first time, the city of San Antonio went
out of its way to look for a professional planner to
lead the planning effort in the city of San Antonio
and ended up hiring, on August 1st of 1971, Edward
F. Davis. And Davis brought to San Antonio for the
first time the
kind of professional stature to the planning
department. And what I mean by that is this. He was
able to recruit nationally a lot of very talented
young planners of various disciplines and get
them to come to San Antonio, very few of whom are
still around. And the second thing is that during
his fairly short tenure, which was only, I guess,
about three years, the planning department
produced, in my opinion, the greatest number of
its studies and some of the really significant
study efforts. He never produced a comprehensive
plan, but what he did do is that he did some in-depth
studies of geographical areas of the city, the
functions of the city, and really dealt with some
special things. They produced the urban design
mechanism study during that period of time. We're
really into major issues that dealt with the
aquifer and urban renewal downtown. The San
Antonio River Corps and a lot of those types of
efforts also are directly related to his period.
So although Ed's tenure was relatively short, his
impact in changing the direction of professional
city planning in San Antonio, both in terms of
staff function, publications, et cetera, I think
was perhaps as significant as anyone's in San
Francisco. I don't know if you knew this or not, but
Ed and I had worked together in San Francisco
before Morpheus came to Texas as members of the San
Francisco Urban Renewal and Planning
Association, and had become quite good friends in
San Francisco. So that when we found ourselves in
Texas together, it was old homework. And Ed was
also on my master's committee from when I was in
school. Was he teaching? Yeah, he was doing some
courses at UTSA. Actually, I think his tenure His
tenure was only about two years. I don't think it
was three years, if I recall. And there was strong
pressure. I mean, he just incurred the wrath of
politicians. It's also interesting that that was
the period of time we'd really get into
overcharacterizing
the period as transitional, if we dealt with the 71
to 73 period as transitional. It certainly was
transitional in terms of planning, but it was also
transitional in terms of politics because he
really came up against the changing city council.
Charlie Becker was a city council person who
represented a lot of that change. The Good
Government League had dominated San Antonio
politics for almost 15 years.
their political influence was starting to
change. And Becker was emerging during this
period of time. And Becker and his supporters were
the new development interests in San Antonio, the
land developers, the home builders, and those.
And those were the people during that period of
time that were the people that were most vehement
in their opposition against the city actually
telling them how to plan their land. And of course,
Davis epitomized this in their eyes, and
ultimately resigned because of it. Davis has
subsequently returned to the West Coast. Yes.
Oregon. Yes. Last I knew, he was in Eugene, and out
of planning altogether. Oh, yes. Actually, a bit
north of Eugene, near Oregon City. Okay, well,
I've lost track of it. So that was Davis. And then
there was a, there was, one of the things is, and I
don't have all these, but in addition to changing
leadership in the planning department,
frequently the planning department changed
names, it wasn't always known as the planning
department, and frequently expanded or
contracted with respect to its
responsibilities. And on, in August of 73,
succeeding Davis officially, Cipriano Guerra,
G-U-E-R-R-A, became director of the planning
department. Actually, at that time, the
community development was coming into its own,
CDBG funds and all that, so it was known as the
Department of Community Development and
Planning. And Guerra's tenure was a fairly short
tenure, two or three year tenure. But a couple of
interesting things did happen during that period
of time. One of which is that the city published
what was called a compendium of plans. And this
wasn't a plan per se. It was published in September
of 1973. It was a compendium of all the plans that
existed at that time, basically dealing with
functional areas, the airport master plan or
various utility plans and things like that. And
that was one effort. A second effort that started
during
Cipriano Guerra's period of time was the initial
effort with respect to the growth sketch and that
whole controversy that occurred in San Antonio.
You were involved in that, weren't you? Well, in
the later parts of that. But the first thing that
occurred in that area was that in June of 1975, and
Guerra was still director of planning at this
time, the planning department made public
something called the Alternative Growth Study.
And that document was kind of a very interesting
document and also spurred
a lot of interest in San Antonio. What had
happened? in San Antonio was that rather than
start dealing with specific plan elements as the
compendium of plans represented there was an
attempt to say how is the community growing in
which direction physically as well as size and
what does that mean in other words if the community
grows in a certain way what does that mean in terms
of long-term effects on the community. So the
initial alternative growth study and the
subsequent study, which was done in
January of 76, called Growth Sketches for San
Antonio, what these studies attempted to do was
just to paint a picture of different future
scenarios of growth. And most of this work was was
under the coordination of the assistant director
of planning, who at that time was Charles
Stromberg. And the reaction to these efforts,
initially by the city council, was just
overreaction, in my opinion. In other words,
people saw, some of the elected officials saw
these, growth studies as major threats to keeping
the public sector out of dealing with the growth
issues in any way. Even though they were... You
mean the public sector or the private sector? The
public sector. Keeping the public sector out of
dealing with growth in any way. Even though These
were the councilors. Again, these were
developers on the city council that didn't want
the city, the public sector, telling them how to
deal with their land. So they saw the growth study
and the growth sketches as the beginning of an
effort on the part of city government to start
planning and dealing with growth. Even though, if
one goes through and reads these documents... the
alternative growth study and the growth sketches
and some of the ones that follow, if you look at
them, they're nothing more than what they claim to
be, scenarios. If these things happen, here's
what the community is going to look like in 20
years. If these things happen, and basically
saying, here are four or five scenarios, which one
do you want? And it wasn't, there wasn't a plan
intended. But There was a great deal of reaction.
Of course, one of the things that happened is that
Stromberg was really forced out of his position.
And there's a great deal of literature and
editorials and writing that dealt with that whole
controversy of him being forced out, largely
because he was the one that was identified of doing
these studies, even though they were extremely
non-threatening types of studies and this whole
thing resulted this whole thing resulted in later
in March of 1977 of a a single document after a
couple of years which was I think was called the
preferred growth sketch finally As I said, these
were introduced. This effort started publicly in
June of 1975 and ended with the city council
approving. And the last city council elected at
large, essentially, approving just before the
election, which was in April of 1977, approving in
March of 1977 in what was called the preferred
growth sketch. So it took almost two years to get
city council, and again by that time many of the
individuals on city council had changed, but it
took two years to get the city council to come up
with a
basic policy statement concerning how the city
was going to grow And that statement then could be
used as a basis for the planning efforts to fall.
But more needs to be said about that.